Many hundreds of exoplanets have been discovered or characterized through extreme-precision radial-velocity (EPRV) measurements made with high-resolution spectrographs. The current challenge is to reach Earth-like planets around Sun-like stars. At present, the best published EPRV programs exhibit 1 m/s (ish) empirical scatter, an order of magnitude higher than the signal of an Earth. This scatter is not dominated by instrument calibration (which is now at the 0.1 m/s level or better); it is largely coming from not-purely-Doppler variability in the stellar spectrum, including surface convection and granulation, asteroseismic pulsations, and magnetic activity.

We propose to develop and implement principled methods for mitigating the effects of stellar noise in RVs by building data-driven spectro-temporal models of stellar variability.

The issue of stellar noise in RV planet observations is pressing right now, as NASA has invested in the NEID Spectrograph on the WIYN Telescope; part of the NN-EXPLORE program), and there are many parallel projects by other players. These new spectrographs are instrumental to the primary goals of NASA's TESS Mission and NASA's exoplanet programs. Without observing and analysis methods capable of dealing with stellar variability, the new generation of instruments are unlikely to achieve their science goals.

This project operates in a set of temporally overlapping stages, each of which delivers methods, code, and refereed papers. In the First Stage (information), the problem is to quantitatively determine how precisely radial velocities could in principle be measured in the presence of stellar variability. This problem can be cast as a problem in information theory or as a problem in causal inference. The proposal is to pursue multiple approaches and to deliver a pair of papers. The outcome will be a principled statistical framework for the RV community’s ongoing efforts in data analysis.

In the Second Stage (p-modes), the problem is to look at mitigation of asteroseismic modes. These modes represent the most straightforward kind of stellar variability, since they have coherent time-domain properties and appear in the spectrum as adiabatic changes. There are at least three methods for mitigation of asteroseismic noise: The modes can be resolved by taking very short exposures. The modes can be near-cancelled by clever choice of exposure times. Or the modes can be fit out from arbitrary exposure sets with customized non-stationary Gaussian processes. The proposal is to explore and compare these, to produce reference implementations that work on real data, and to write a paper for the refereed literature documenting these and delivering conclusions and recommendations.

In the Third Stage (stochastics), the project will expand its scope to all kinds of variability associated with convection, granulation, convective shifts, star-spots, faculae, magnetic activity, and flares. Each of these have expected structure in both the time and spectral domains, which will set the causal structure of appropriate data-driven models. The proposal is to build on success the PIs have had in modeling RV data with their ‘wobble’ package to build these models, release high-quality open-source code, and produce refereed publications.

All data needed for this project are already in hand from public sources, and more public data will appear during the project. All methods and code in the project will be released under open-source licenses. The proposers will operate a pair of community workshops in Years 2 and 3 of the grant to help the community to adopt and incorporate the findings, methods, and code produced in this project into instrument pipelines and data-analysis stacks.
